README.md, before:

# Azure DevOps Data Collection Report

A script to collect data from Azure DevOps organizations.
This is designed as an easy script for Azure DevOps Administrators to run on each organization to understand their ADO landscape. 
Solving "As an ADO Administrator I don't want to write a custom API script or click through many pages to get visibility into ADO data."

## Overview

The `ado-data-collector.sh` script automates the collection of data from your Azure DevOps organization. It analyzes projects, repositories, pipelines, integrations, users, and metadata, producing a data-driven report.

## Prerequisites

Before running the script, ensure you have the following:

### Azure DevOps Organization Settings

1. **Third-Party application access via OAuth** must be enabled:
   - Go to your Azure DevOps organization: `https://dev.azure.com/{your-org}`
   - Click **Organization settings** (bottom left)
   - Navigate to **Policies** under Security
   - Enable **Third-party application access via OAuth**

2. **Azure account access**: Your Azure account must have access to the Azure DevOps organization you want to scan

### Required Tools

1. **Azure CLI** (for authentication):
   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install azure-cli
   
   # Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
   curl -sL https://aka.ms/InstallAzureCLIDeb | sudo bash
   
   # Linux (RHEL/CentOS)
   sudo rpm --import https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc
   sudo dnf install azure-cli
   ```

2. **jq** (JSON processor):
   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install jq
   
   # Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
   sudo apt-get install jq
   
   # Linux (RHEL/CentOS)
   sudo yum install jq
   ```

3. **curl** (usually pre-installed on most systems)

4. **git** (required only if using `SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1` option):
   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install git
   
   # Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
   sudo apt-get install git
   
   # Linux (RHEL/CentOS)
   sudo yum install git
   ```

## Setup Instructions

### Step 1: Login to Azure

The script uses Azure AD authentication via the Azure CLI. This is more secure than PAT tokens and provides access to all Azure DevOps APIs including Advanced Security.

```bash
# Login to Azure (opens browser for authentication)
az login

# Verify you're logged in
az account show
```

**Note**: Your Azure account must have access to the Azure DevOps organization you want to scan.

### Step 2: Set Organization Name

The script requires you to specify your Azure DevOps organization name via the `ORG` environment variable:

```bash
# Set your organization name
export ORG="your-org-name"

# Or set it inline when running the script
ORG="your-org-name" ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

**Note**: The script will fail with a clear error message if `ORG` is not set, preventing accidental runs against invalid organizations.

### Step 3: Make the Script Executable

```bash
chmod +x ado-data-collector.sh
```

### Step 4: Run the Script

```bash
# Run with default mode (API-only, faster)
ORG="your-org-name" ./ado-data-collector.sh

# Run with large file scanning (clones repos, slower but detects individual large files)
ORG="your-org-name" SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh

# Run with debug output to see API calls
ORG="your-org-name" DEBUG=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh

# Combine options
ORG="your-org-name" DEBUG=1 SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

The script will:
- Validate authentication before starting
- Display progress information in the console
- Generate a timestamped report file: `ado-data-report-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.txt`
- Automatically clean up temporary data on completion or interruption

**Expected Runtime**: 
- **Default mode**: 5-15 minutes depending on organization size
- **With SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1**: 10-30 minutes (clones repositories for file scanning)

## Features

### Robust Error Handling
- Early authentication validation with clear error messages
- Graceful handling of API failures and network timeouts
- Automatic retry logic for transient failures (30-second timeout, 2 retries)
- Concurrent execution safety with unique temp directories per run

### Edge Case Support
- Handles project/repository names with spaces, special characters, UTF-8, quotes, and backslashes
- Safely processes empty organizations or projects with no repositories
- Properly encodes all URLs for API compatibility
- Locale-independent sorting for consistent results

## Report Contents

The generated report includes factual data only, it does not make assessments or recommendations:

### 1. **Repository Count**
   - Total number of projects and repositories

### 2. **Repositories Over 1GB (API-Reported Size)**
   - List of repositories exceeding 1GB based on Azure DevOps API size metric
   - Sizes shown in GB

### 3. **Largest Repository (API-Reported Size)**
   - Repository with the largest API-reported size
   - Size shown in MB or GB

### 4. **Oldest Repository**
   - Repository with the earliest commit
   - First commit date and ID

### 5. **Large Files Scan (Individual File Sizes)**
   - **Default mode**: Shows instructions for manual inspection
   - **With SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1**: Automatically scans Git history for files >50MB
     - Lists all large files with exact sizes
     - Includes files from entire Git history (even if deleted)
     - Provides GitHub migration guidance (50MB warning, 100MB block)

### 6. **Metadata Data**
   - Work items count
   - Pull requests count
   - Projects with boards/teams

### 7. **Pipeline Data**
   - Total pipelines count
   - Repositories with pipelines

### 8. **Security Scanning (Advanced Security)**
   - **If Advanced Security is enabled**: Reports on security alerts
     - Secret scanning alerts (credentials, tokens, API keys)
       - **Detailed export**: All secret alert details exported to separate report file
       - Includes validation status, file locations, severity, confidence levels, and timelines
     - Dependency scanning alerts (vulnerable packages)
     - Code scanning alerts (security vulnerabilities)
     - Repositories with security alerts
   - **If not enabled**: Provides information about the feature and alternatives
   - Note: Azure DevOps Advanced Security is a paid add-on feature

### 9. **Custom Integrations**
   - Service hooks count
   - Integration types found

### 10. **User Data**
   - Total user count
   - User access level breakdown
   - Exported user list (CSV format)

### 11. **Migration Data Summary**
   - Consolidated statistics from all sections
   - Includes large file counts when SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1
   - Includes security alert counts if Advanced Security is enabled

## Output Files

After running the script, you'll find:

- **`ado-data-report-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.txt`** - Main report file with summary statistics
- **`ado-secret-scanning-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.txt`** - Detailed secret scanning report (only generated if secret alerts are found)
- **`users.csv`** (if users exist) - User list with access levels and contact information

### Secret Scanning Report Details

When Azure DevOps Advanced Security is enabled and secret alerts are detected, a separate detailed report is generated containing:

- **Alert Identification**: Alert ID, secret type, and severity
- **Validation Information**: Validation status and messages from Azure DevOps
- **Location Details**: File path, line numbers, and branch information
- **Timeline**: When the secret was introduced, first seen, and last seen
- **Detection Tools**: Which scanning tools detected the secret
- **Direct Links**: URLs to view alerts in Azure DevOps

This detailed report helps security teams prioritize remediation efforts before migration to GitHub.

Note: Temporary data is automatically cleaned up on script completion or interruption.

## Troubleshooting

### "Authentication Failed" on Startup
- Run `az login` to authenticate with Azure
- Verify your Azure account has access to the Azure DevOps organization
- Run `az account show` to confirm you're logged in
- Check that the organization name is correct (no spaces or special characters in URL)

### "Command not found: jq"
- Install jq using the commands in the Prerequisites section

### Network Timeouts
- Script includes 30-second timeout with 2 automatic retries
- Check your network connection if multiple API calls fail
- Large organizations may take longer but should complete within timeout limits

### Empty or Missing Data in Report
- Some repositories may not report size via API
- Empty projects (no repositories) are automatically skipped
- If all projects are empty, script will exit early with a message

### Script Interrupted (Ctrl+C)
- Temporary files are automatically cleaned up
- Report file (if partially created) will remain
- Safe to re-run the script

## Using the Report

The generated report provides factual data to support migration planning discussions. Use the data to:
- Understand the scope of content to migrate
- Identify which repositories contain the most data
- Document existing integrations and their types
- Export user lists for account mapping planning

## Example Scripts

This repository also includes example scripts:
- `report-generator-example-1.sh` - Repository size analysis with LFS details
- `report-generator-example-2a.sh` - Basic repository metrics with oldest commits
- `report-generator-example-2b.sh` - Filter repositories by size

## Security Best Practices

- **Token Security**: Azure AD bearer tokens are stored in secure temporary files with restrictive permissions (600)
  - Never exposed in process listings or command-line arguments
  - Automatically cleaned up on script exit (success, failure, or interruption)
  - Uses `mktemp` for unpredictable filenames to prevent race conditions
- **Token Lifecycle**: Tokens automatically expire after 1 hour; script includes refresh logic for long-running operations
- **No Secrets in Code**: Authentication uses `az login` - no PAT tokens or credentials stored in script
- **Clean Output**: Progress messages hidden by default; use `DEBUG=1` for detailed output
- **Secure Cleanup**: Trap handlers ensure temporary files are removed even if script is interrupted
- **Report Security**: 
  - Add `ado-data-report-*.txt` to `.gitignore`
  - Store reports securely as they contain organizational information
  - Consider encrypting reports if storing long-term

## Advanced Usage

### Debug Mode
Enable debug output to see all API calls:
```bash
DEBUG=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

### Large File Scanning
Enable automatic large file detection (requires Git):
```bash
SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

**How it works:**
- Clones each repository as a bare repository (faster, no working directory)
- Scans entire Git object database for all blobs
- Detects files >50MB anywhere in Git history
- Identifies files even if they were deleted in later commits
- Reports exact file sizes and paths

**When to use:**
- Planning GitHub migration (GitHub warns at 50MB, blocks at 100MB)
- Identifying candidates for Git LFS conversion
- Understanding true repository size vs API-reported size
- Finding large files that may have been deleted but still bloat the repo

**Performance note:** This mode is slower as it clones repositories, but provides accurate file-level analysis.

### Concurrent Execution
The script is safe for concurrent execution:
- Each run creates a unique temporary directory using process ID
- Report files include random number to prevent collisions
- Multiple instances can run simultaneously without conflicts

### Environment Variables
Configure the script using environment variables:
```bash
# Required: Set your organization name
export ORG="your-org-name"

# Optional: Enable large file scanning
export SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1

# Optional: Enable debug output
export DEBUG=1

# Run the script
./ado-data-collector.sh
```

**Configuration Options:**
- `ORG` (required): Your Azure DevOps organization name
- `SCAN_LARGE_FILES` (optional, default=0): Set to 1 to scan for large files
- `DEBUG` (optional, default=0): Set to 1 for detailed API call output

**Note**: Authentication is handled via `az login` - no PAT required.

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Review the troubleshooting section above
2. Check that all prerequisites are installed correctly
3. Verify you're logged in with `az login` and have access to the organization
4. Open an issue in this repository with error details

Commit message:

Add CSV and JSON export formats for secret scanning reports; update README.md and .gitignore accordingly

README.md, after:

# Azure DevOps Data Collection Report

A script to collect data from Azure DevOps organizations.
This is designed as an easy script for Azure DevOps Administrators to run on each organization to understand their ADO landscape. 
Solving "As an ADO Administrator I don't want to write a custom API script or click through many pages to get visibility into ADO data."

## Overview

The `ado-data-collector.sh` script automates the collection of data from your Azure DevOps organization. It analyzes projects, repositories, pipelines, integrations, users, and metadata, producing a data-driven report.

## Prerequisites

Before running the script, ensure you have the following:

### Azure DevOps Organization Settings

1. **Third-Party application access via OAuth** must be enabled:
   - Go to your Azure DevOps organization: `https://dev.azure.com/{your-org}`
   - Click **Organization settings** (bottom left)
   - Navigate to **Policies** under Security
   - Enable **Third-party application access via OAuth**

2. **Azure account access**: Your Azure account must have access to the Azure DevOps organization you want to scan

### Required Tools

1. **Azure CLI** (for authentication):
   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install azure-cli
   
   # Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
   curl -sL https://aka.ms/InstallAzureCLIDeb | sudo bash
   
   # Linux (RHEL/CentOS)
   sudo rpm --import https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc
   sudo dnf install azure-cli
   ```

2. **jq** (JSON processor):
   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install jq
   
   # Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
   sudo apt-get install jq
   
   # Linux (RHEL/CentOS)
   sudo yum install jq
   ```

3. **curl** (usually pre-installed on most systems)

4. **git** (required only if using `SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1` option):
   ```bash
   # macOS
   brew install git
   
   # Linux (Ubuntu/Debian)
   sudo apt-get install git
   
   # Linux (RHEL/CentOS)
   sudo yum install git
   ```

## Setup Instructions

### Step 1: Login to Azure

The script uses Azure AD authentication via the Azure CLI. This is more secure than PAT tokens and provides access to all Azure DevOps APIs including Advanced Security.

```bash
# Login to Azure (opens browser for authentication)
az login

# Verify you're logged in
az account show
```

**Note**: Your Azure account must have access to the Azure DevOps organization you want to scan.

### Step 2: Set Organization Name

The script requires you to specify your Azure DevOps organization name via the `ORG` environment variable:

```bash
# Set your organization name
export ORG="your-org-name"

# Or set it inline when running the script
ORG="your-org-name" ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

**Note**: The script will fail with a clear error message if `ORG` is not set, preventing accidental runs against invalid organizations.

### Step 3: Make the Script Executable

```bash
chmod +x ado-data-collector.sh
```

### Step 4: Run the Script

```bash
# Run with default mode (API-only, faster)
ORG="your-org-name" ./ado-data-collector.sh

# Run with large file scanning (clones repos, slower but detects individual large files)
ORG="your-org-name" SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh

# Run with debug output to see API calls
ORG="your-org-name" DEBUG=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh

# Combine options
ORG="your-org-name" DEBUG=1 SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

The script will:
- Validate authentication before starting
- Display progress information in the console
- Generate a timestamped report file: `ado-data-report-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.txt`
- Automatically clean up temporary data on completion or interruption

**Expected Runtime**: 
- **Default mode**: 5-15 minutes depending on organization size
- **With SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1**: 10-30 minutes (clones repositories for file scanning)

## Features

### Robust Error Handling
- Early authentication validation with clear error messages
- Graceful handling of API failures and network timeouts
- Automatic retry logic for transient failures (30-second timeout, 2 retries)
- Concurrent execution safety with unique temp directories per run

### Edge Case Support
- Handles project/repository names with spaces, special characters, UTF-8, quotes, and backslashes
- Safely processes empty organizations or projects with no repositories
- Properly encodes all URLs for API compatibility
- Locale-independent sorting for consistent results

## Report Contents

The generated report includes factual data only, it does not make assessments or recommendations:

### 1. **Repository Count**
   - Total number of projects and repositories

### 2. **Repositories Over 1GB (API-Reported Size)**
   - List of repositories exceeding 1GB based on Azure DevOps API size metric
   - Sizes shown in GB

### 3. **Largest Repository (API-Reported Size)**
   - Repository with the largest API-reported size
   - Size shown in MB or GB

### 4. **Oldest Repository**
   - Repository with the earliest commit
   - First commit date and ID

### 5. **Large Files Scan (Individual File Sizes)**
   - **Default mode**: Shows instructions for manual inspection
   - **With SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1**: Automatically scans Git history for files >50MB
     - Lists all large files with exact sizes
     - Includes files from entire Git history (even if deleted)
     - Provides GitHub migration guidance (50MB warning, 100MB block)

### 6. **Metadata Data**
   - Work items count
   - Pull requests count
   - Projects with boards/teams

### 7. **Pipeline Data**
   - Total pipelines count
   - Repositories with pipelines

### 8. **Security Scanning (Advanced Security)**
   - **If Advanced Security is enabled**: Reports on security alerts
     - Secret scanning alerts (credentials, tokens, API keys)
       - **Detailed export**: All secret alert details exported to separate report file
       - Includes validation status, file locations, severity, confidence levels, and timelines
     - Dependency scanning alerts (vulnerable packages)
     - Code scanning alerts (security vulnerabilities)
     - Repositories with security alerts
   - **If not enabled**: Provides information about the feature and alternatives
   - Note: Azure DevOps Advanced Security is a paid add-on feature

### 9. **Custom Integrations**
   - Service hooks count
   - Integration types found

### 10. **User Data**
   - Total user count
   - User access level breakdown
   - Exported user list (CSV format)

### 11. **Migration Data Summary**
   - Consolidated statistics from all sections
   - Includes large file counts when SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1
   - Includes security alert counts if Advanced Security is enabled

## Output Files

After running the script, you'll find:

- **`ado-data-report-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.txt`** - Main report file with summary statistics
- **`ado-secret-scanning-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.txt`** - Detailed secret scanning report (only generated if secret alerts are found)
- **`ado-secret-scanning-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.csv`** - Excel-compatible CSV export of all secret alerts (only generated if secret alerts are found)
- **`ado-secret-scanning-YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXX.json`** - Machine-readable JSON export of all secret alerts (only generated if secret alerts are found)
- **`users.csv`** (if users exist) - User list with access levels and contact information

### Secret Scanning Report Details

When Azure DevOps Advanced Security is enabled and secret alerts are detected, three separate reports are generated:

#### Text Report (`.txt`)
Human-readable format containing:
- **Alert Identification**: Alert ID, secret type, and severity
- **Validation Information**: Validation status and messages from Azure DevOps
- **Location Details**: File path, line numbers, and branch information
- **Timeline**: When the secret was introduced, first seen, and last seen
- **Detection Tools**: Which scanning tools detected the secret
- **Direct Links**: URLs to view alerts in Azure DevOps

#### CSV Report (`.csv`)
Excel-compatible format with the same information in tabular form, allowing system administrators to:
- Sort and filter by severity, confidence, or validation status
- Identify patterns across projects and repositories
- Track remediation progress
- Generate pivot tables and charts
- Share filtered subsets with teams

#### JSON Report (`.json`)
Machine-readable format with structured data, enabling:
- Programmatic processing and automation
- Integration with security tools and dashboards
- Custom reporting and analytics pipelines
- API consumption by other systems
- Version control and diff tracking

This detailed report helps security teams prioritize remediation efforts before migration to GitHub.

Note: Temporary data is automatically cleaned up on script completion or interruption.

## Troubleshooting

### "Authentication Failed" on Startup
- Run `az login` to authenticate with Azure
- Verify your Azure account has access to the Azure DevOps organization
- Run `az account show` to confirm you're logged in
- Check that the organization name is correct (no spaces or special characters in URL)

### "Command not found: jq"
- Install jq using the commands in the Prerequisites section

### Network Timeouts
- Script includes 30-second timeout with 2 automatic retries
- Check your network connection if multiple API calls fail
- Large organizations may take longer but should complete within timeout limits

### Empty or Missing Data in Report
- Some repositories may not report size via API
- Empty projects (no repositories) are automatically skipped
- If all projects are empty, script will exit early with a message

### Script Interrupted (Ctrl+C)
- Temporary files are automatically cleaned up
- Report file (if partially created) will remain
- Safe to re-run the script

## Using the Report

The generated report provides factual data to support migration planning discussions. Use the data to:
- Understand the scope of content to migrate
- Identify which repositories contain the most data
- Document existing integrations and their types
- Export user lists for account mapping planning

## Example Scripts

This repository also includes example scripts:
- `report-generator-example-1.sh` - Repository size analysis with LFS details
- `report-generator-example-2a.sh` - Basic repository metrics with oldest commits
- `report-generator-example-2b.sh` - Filter repositories by size

## Security Best Practices

- **Token Security**: Azure AD bearer tokens are stored in secure temporary files with restrictive permissions (600)
  - Never exposed in process listings or command-line arguments
  - Automatically cleaned up on script exit (success, failure, or interruption)
  - Uses `mktemp` for unpredictable filenames to prevent race conditions
- **Token Lifecycle**: Tokens automatically expire after 1 hour; script includes refresh logic for long-running operations
- **No Secrets in Code**: Authentication uses `az login` - no PAT tokens or credentials stored in script
- **Clean Output**: Progress messages hidden by default; use `DEBUG=1` for detailed output
- **Secure Cleanup**: Trap handlers ensure temporary files are removed even if script is interrupted
- **Report Security**: 
  - Add `ado-data-report-*.txt` to `.gitignore`
  - Store reports securely as they contain organizational information
  - Consider encrypting reports if storing long-term

## Advanced Usage

### Debug Mode
Enable debug output to see all API calls:
```bash
DEBUG=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

### Large File Scanning
Enable automatic large file detection (requires Git):
```bash
SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1 ./ado-data-collector.sh
```

**How it works:**
- Clones each repository as a bare repository (faster, no working directory)
- Scans entire Git object database for all blobs
- Detects files >50MB anywhere in Git history
- Identifies files even if they were deleted in later commits
- Reports exact file sizes and paths

**When to use:**
- Planning GitHub migration (GitHub warns at 50MB, blocks at 100MB)
- Identifying candidates for Git LFS conversion
- Understanding true repository size vs API-reported size
- Finding large files that may have been deleted but still bloat the repo

**Performance note:** This mode is slower as it clones repositories, but provides accurate file-level analysis.

### Concurrent Execution
The script is safe for concurrent execution:
- Each run creates a unique temporary directory using process ID
- Report files include random number to prevent collisions
- Multiple instances can run simultaneously without conflicts

### Environment Variables
Configure the script using environment variables:
```bash
# Required: Set your organization name
export ORG="your-org-name"

# Optional: Enable large file scanning
export SCAN_LARGE_FILES=1

# Optional: Enable debug output
export DEBUG=1

# Run the script
./ado-data-collector.sh
```

**Configuration Options:**
- `ORG` (required): Your Azure DevOps organization name
- `SCAN_LARGE_FILES` (optional, default=0): Set to 1 to scan for large files
- `DEBUG` (optional, default=0): Set to 1 for detailed API call output

**Note**: Authentication is handled via `az login` - no PAT required.

## Support

For issues or questions:
1. Review the troubleshooting section above
2. Check that all prerequisites are installed correctly
3. Verify you're logged in with `az login` and have access to the organization
4. Open an issue in this repository with error details
